6-8 English
From BBCLearningEnglish.com
Hello, this is 6-minute English from BBCLearningEnglish. I'm Phil
And I'm Georgie
If you're a swifty, that's a fan of Popstar Taylor Swift. Her music rocks your world
I like that phrase rock your world Phil. It means that something makes your life enjoyable, right?
Well, yes, but actually no Georgie. I mean Taylor Swift literally rocks the world
At a recent concert in Edinburgh as part of Taylor Swift's Eros tour, her fans energetic dancing literally moved the earth
With seismic activity usually associated with earthquakes detected four miles away
Yes, it's hard to believe that in this program we'll be hearing about the swift quake
A powerful force like an earthquake coming not from nature, but from a pop concert
And as usual, we'll be learning some useful new vocabulary as well
Great, but first I have a question for you Georgie
Actually, Taylor Swift's Edinburgh show wasn't the first music concert to trigger seismic waves
In 1992, the band Madness
It was two earthquakes that saw local residents evacuated from their homes
But at which London venue did the concert take place? Was it a, hide park?
B, the Royal Albert Hall or C, Finns Repark?
I'll guess the concert was held at the Royal Albert Hall
Okay, Georgie, I'll reveal the correct answer at the end of the program
Following Taylor Swift's Edinburgh concert, seismologist Emma Greener and James Pantern from Cardiff University
Wanted to see if the same thing would happen at Taylor's concert in Cardiff
seismologists are scientists who study earthquakes and seismic waves
Emma and James set up their equipment to monitor and record ground motion as the concert got started
As James explains here to Marny Chesterton, presenter of BBC Radio 4 program Inside Science
Tell me about the peak on this graph that you're seeing and what that actually corresponds to
In this top graph of the red wiggly line, we're looking at the ground velocity in essentially meters per second
So that's the velocity that the ground is vibrating up and down
So this is literally people stamping up and down
Yes, this is all of the energy combined from the 75,000 people in the stadium
Jumping in unison and stamping in unison
James, the British geological survey recorded 23.4 nanometers of movement in Edinburgh
What does that actually mean?
So what that means is that they recorded the ground flexing up and down by a distance of 23 nanometers
James's equipment recorded seismic movement when Taylor Swift started to sing
Her hit song, Croll Summer, created a peak, the highest point in the graph which James's machine was drawing
The peak was made by thousands of Swifties jumping up and down in unison together and at the same time
Creating something like a mini earthquake
The seismologists measured a ground movement of 23 nanometers
That may not sound much, but remember this is the earth itself actually flexing or bending without breaking
So the ground is shaking, music is blasting and thousands of fans are dancing
But does this qualify as an earthquake scientifically speaking?
Here's James Panton and Marny Chesterton again for BBC Radio 4's Inside Science
James, impressive as this is to see coming up on your seismograph
This is not the same league really as an earthquake
No, definitely not
There have been some people who have tried to convert the energy output from concerts
Into a local magnitude scale to make it comparable to an earthquake
And when that's happened, we find magnitude that are generally less than one
Sadly, the answer to Gorge's question is no
The Taylor Swift concert wasn't technically an earthquake
Marny says the concert was not in the same league
Meaning not nearly as good or important as something else
Yes, the energy created by the music sound waves and thousands of fans jumping
Did move the earth, but not in a way that's comparable or similar to a real earthquake
By definition, an earthquake must break the earth's crust
And is caused by either the movement of tectonic plates or a volcano
Officially Taylor Swift didn't cause an earthquake
But for the Swifties, it probably felt like one
All of which brings us back to my question, Gorge
I asked you about another earth shattering concert involving the British band Madness
But where inland did the show take place
And I guessed it was at the Royal Albert Hall
Which was the wrong answer I'm afraid, Gorge, in fact the concert happened in Finsbury Park
Okay, let's recap the vocabulary we've learnt in this program
Starting with the phrase, Rock Your World
Meaning that someone or something has a positive effect on you
Making your life enjoyable
A peak is the highest point of something
When things happen in unison, they happen together at the same time
To flex means to bend without breaking
If you say something is not in the same league as something else
You mean it's nowhere near as good or important
And finally the adjective comparable means similar in size, amount or quality
Once again, our six minutes are up
But remember to join us again next time for more trending topics and useful vocabulary
Here at six-minute English, goodbye for now
Bye